
BACKGROUND. Anterior gradient 2 (AGR2) is associated with metastatic progression in
prostate cancer cells as well as other normal and malignant tissues. We investigated AGR2
expression in patients with metastatic prostate cancer.
METHODS. Blood was collected from 44 patients with metastatic prostate cancer separated
as: castration sensitive prostate cancer (CSPC, n ¼ 5); castration resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC, n ¼ 36); and neuroendocrine-predominate CRPC defined by PSA  1 ng/ml in the
presence of wide-spread metastatic disease (NE-CRPC, n ¼ 3). AGR2 mRNA levels were
measured with RT-PCR in circulating tumor cell (CTC)-enriched peripheral blood. Plasma
AGR2 levels were determined via ELISA assay. AGR2 expression was modulated in prostate
cancer cell lines using plasmid and viral vectors.
RESULTS. AGR2 mRNA levels are elevated in CTCs and strongly correlated with CTC enumeration. Plasma AGR2 levels are elevated in all sub-groups. AGR2 levels vary independently to PSA and change in some patients in response to androgen-directed and other therapies.
Plasma AGR2 levels are highest in the NE-CRPC sub-group. A correlation between AGR2,
chromagranin A (CGA), and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) expression is demonstrated in
prostate cancer cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS. We conclude that AGR2 expression is elevated at the mRNA and protein
level in patients with metastatic prostate cancer. In particular, we find that AGR2 expression
is associated features consistent with neuroendocrine, or anaplastic, prostate cancer, exemplified by an aggressive clinical phenotype without elevation in circulating PSA levels. Further
studies are warranted to explore the mechanistic and prognostic implications of AGR2
expression in this patient population. Prostate # 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
KEY WORDS:

AGR2; neuroendocrine prostate cancer; metastasis; biomarker

INTRODUCTION
Prostate cancer is a common disease affecting men
in the U.S. with a projected incidence of over 200,000
cases in 2010 [1]. Most patients are diagnosed with
localized prostate cancer which is effectively treated
with surgery, radiation, or active surveillance. For
others, prostate cancer recurs despite primary therapy. The mainstay of therapy for recurrent or metastatic prostate cancer is androgen-deprivation therapy.
While most patients initially respond to androgen
withdrawal (castration sensitive prostate cancer,
CSPC), clinical advancement despite low levels of
ß 2012 Wiley Periodicals,Inc.

Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article.
Abbreviations: AGR2, anterior gradient 2; CSPC, castration sensitive prostate cancer; CRPC, castration resistant prostate cancer; NECRPC, neuroendocrine-predominate CRPC; PSA, prostate specific
antigen; CGA, chromagranin A; NSE, neuron-specific enolase; CTC,
circulating tumor cell; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunoassay.
*Correspondence to: Dr. Mitchell E. Gross, MD, PhD, USC Center
for Applied Molecular Medicine, 2250 Alcazar St., Suite 240, Los
Angeles, CA 90033. E-mail: mitchell.gross@usc.edu
Received 19 April 2012; Accepted 10 July 2012
DOI 10.1002/pros.22569
Published online in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com).

2

Kani et al.

circulating androgens signals progression to castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) which is associated with the majority of the prostate cancer related
morbidity and mortality.
Anterior gradient 2 (AGR2) is a member of the
protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) family which is
expressed in a variety of normal and transformed
epithelial tissues [2,3]. Pre-clinical studies have
shown that AGR2 expression is associated with increased cell migration and metastatic behavior in a
variety of tumor models [4–7]. Other studies show
that AGR2 expression is modulated by androgens
through ErbB3 binding protein 1 and Fox A transcription factors and confirm an association with a
more metastatic phenotype [2,8]. AGR2 expression
has also been associated with docetaxel-resistance
in the neuroendocrine-like PC3 prostate cancer cell
line in vitro [9]. AGR2 is known to be expressed in
primary prostate cancer tissues, and AGR2 levels
have been explored as a potential urine-based diagnostic marker for prostate cancer [2,10]. At the tissue level, changes in AGR2 expression in primary
prostate cancer tissue have been associated with either increased [11] or decreased [12] rates of clinical progression. To our knowledge, no studies have
examined expression of AGR2 in blood or tissue in
patients with metastatic prostate cancer.
Access to metastatic prostate cancer tissue for molecular characterization is very limited. Metastatic
prostate cancer generally develops over many years,
and after many therapies from the time diagnostic tissues are usually available. Genetic and other molecular abnormalities present in CRPC may not reflect
abnormalities present in an initial diagnostic biopsy
obtained many years or even decades earlier. Even if
tumor tissue could be directly sampled in the setting
of metastatic CRPC, autopsy data highlights the tremendous intra-individual variation in biomarker expression across metastatic tumors sites [13].
Examination of markers in peripheral blood represents a strategy to obtain a more complete representation of all tumors present in an individual.
Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have been identified in the peripheral blood of cancer patients using a
variety of purification and detection techniques
[14,15]. The CellSearch system is the first system to
receive marketing approval by the US FDA for CTC
enumeration as a prognostic marker in patients with
metastatic breast, colorectal, and prostate cancer. We
have demonstrated that CTC-enriched blood contains
androgen receptor mutation profiles similar to those
found in metastatic prostate cancer deposits [16]. Other studies have also used the CellSearch system to
study gene and protein level changes from patients
with metastatic breast and prostate cancer [17–22].
The Prostate

Plasma AGR2 levels have been found to be elevated
patients with ovarian and pancreatic cancer [23,24].
Taken together, these studies support our efforts to
apply blood-based assays to examine AGR2 expression in patients with metastatic prostate cancer.
MATERIALS ANDMETHODS
Eligibility and Blood Collection
Patients with histologically diagnosed adenocarcinoma of the prostate with metastatic disease demonstrated by routine clinical imaging studies were
approached for participation in a correlative study.
Blood collection included an ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) tube processed and stored for
plasma. In most cases, parallel tubes (CellSave and
CTC profile tubes for CellSearch) were also collected
and processed for CTC enumeration and RNA isolation, respectively, as previously described [16,21,22].
All blood was collected with informed consent of subjects under an Institution Review Board approved
protocol at all participating institutions. Control plasma from normal male subjects (age >50 years old)
was purchased from Bioreclamation, LLC (Westbury,
NY).
Enzyme-Linked Immuno-Assay (ELISA)
AGR2 protein levels were quantitatively assessed
by a commercial ELISA kit purchased from Uscn Lifesciences, Wahun, China. All samples were maintained
at 808C. Plasma was allowed to thaw on ice,
inverted several times, and centrifuged for 1 min at
200g prior to immuno-assay. Sample location on the
96-well plate were randomized in order to eliminate
plate bias. Each sample was analyzed at multiple
dilutions. The final AGR2 concentration was obtained
based on the dilution which corresponded to the linear portion of the standard curve.
The AGR2 ELISA was performed according to
manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 100 ml of each
sample (diluted with standard diluents provided by
Uscn) was added to each well and incubated overnight at 48C while rocking. Samples were aspirated
and 100 ml of detection reagent A was added to each
well and incubated for 1 hr at 378C. Each well was
aspirated and washed three times with wash buffer
(Uscn). One hundred microliters of detection reagent
B was added to each well and incubated for 30 min at
378C. Samples were aspirated and washed five times.
Ninety microliters of the substrate solution was
added to each well and incubated for 20 min at 378C
in the dark. Fifty microliters of the stop solution was
added to each well and OD at 450 nm was measured.
The ELISA kit for CGA was obtained from Abnova

AGR2 is a Biomarker of Metastatic Prostate Cancer
(Walnut, CA) and performed according to manufacturer’s instructions. The normal plasma CGA range
for this assay is <100 ng/ml according to the
manufacturer.
CirculatingTumor Cell (CTC) Enumeration
Seven and a half milliliters of blood for CTC enumeration was drawn into CellSave preservative tubes.
Samples were processed using the CellSearch Epithelial Cell Kit (Veridex, LLC; Raritan, NJ) and CTC
counts determined on the CellTracks Analyzer (Veridex, LLC) according to manufacturer’s instructions.
mRNAIsolation and AGR2 Expression
For gene expression studies, 7.5 ml of blood was
drawn into EDTA tubes and processed for CTCs
using the CellSearch Profile Kit (Veridex LLC) followed by RNA isolation basically as previously described [16,21,22]. Briefly, RNA isolation was
performed with the AllPrep DNA/RNA Micro Kit
(Qiagen; Valencia, CA) according to manufacturer’s
instructions. The turnaround time was no more than
36 hr from the blood draw to CTC enrichment and
nucleic acid isolation. RNA quality and quantity were
assessed with the Agilent Bioanalyzer. All samples
were stored at 808C until further use. First strand
cDNA was synthesized from equal amounts of template RNA from CTC-enriched peripheral blood using
a High Capacity cDNA archive kit then amplified
with the ABI TaqManPreAmp method (Applied Biosystems), which has been shown to reliably and reproducibly amplify mRNA for expression analysis
from a single cell [21]. Absolute AGR2 mRNA expression levels were quantified based on the CT computed
on the ABI7900 system (Applied Biosystems, Foster
City, CA). The probe sets and conditions were provided by the manufacturer for AGR2 (ABI Assay on demand Probe set: Hs00180702_m1), as described
previously [22]. The minimal detection limit was considered to be 40 cycles.CTC-enriched RNA samples
from 26 normal individuals were also run as controls.
Cell Culture and Materials
22Rv1, DU145, and PC3 cells were obtained from
the ATCC (Manassas, VA) and were cultured in
RPMI (22Rv1), DMEM (DU145), and F12K (PC3)
containing 10% FBS. AGR2 cDNA and GFP cDNA
were purchased from Origene (Rockville, MD) and
cloned into the pLVX-cmv-IRES-neo vector purchased
from Clonetech (Mountain View, CA). Lentiviral
particles containing sequences targeting 30 UTR of
AGR2 (CCGGCCTTGAGACTTGAAACCAGAACTCGAGTTCTGGTTTCAAGTCTCAAGGTTTTTTG) and

3

scrambled shRNA were purchased from Sigma–
Aldrich (St. Louis, MO).
Immunoblotting
Prostate cancer cell lines were used to study
effects of altered AGR2 levels in prostate cancer
models as previously described [25]. Stable cell
lines were produced via transfection or lentiviral
infection according to manufacturer’s instructions,
and cell population with altered level of AGR2 expression were obtained following G418 selection
(Gemini Biosciences, West Sacramento, CA). Cells
were grown in 10 cm plates until 75–85% confluent
and lysed with RIPA buffer, homogenized with a
28 gauged syringe, centrifuged at 14,000g for
10 minutes. Equal mass of protein lysates was determined by use of Bradford Assay (ThermoScientific, Rockford, IL). Lysates were loaded on a
4–20% acrylamide gel (ThermoScientific) and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane. Antibodies directed to AGR2 (Abnova, Walnut, CA), CGA
(Sigma–Aldrich), NSE (Dako USA, Carptenteria,
CA), and actin (Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, MO)
were used according to manufacturers’ directions.
Statistical Analysis
AGR2 levels of serum samples were assessed by
arithmetic average of measurements across dilutions
in which all values were in the linear calibration range
and not determined to be outliers. Measurement outliers were detected using either DFFITS >1 in estimating the logarithmic mean value [26] (for n  5
replicates) or a value deviating by more than a factor
of two from the average of the other replicates (for
n < 5 replicates, at most one outlier declared per sample); of 316 measurements, 16 outliers (5%) were
detected and removed. Parametric testing for significant differences in serum AGR2 between metastatic
prostate cancer cohorts and normal controls was performed using ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparison adjustment; a logarithmic variance
normalizing transform was applied prior to significance testing. To accommodate unequal group variances, parametric testing for significant differences in
serum CGA was performed using Welch’s t-test on
logarithm-transformed data followed by Bonferroni
correction for multiple comparisons. Relative longitudinal values of AGR2 and corresponding 95% confidence intervals were estimated by applying a
categorical fixed effects model for logarithmic AGR2
level which included the time point (T0, T1, T2) as a
nested factor within the clinical subject factor. All statistical analyses were performed using R version
2.14.0 (www.r-project.org).
The Prostate

4

Kani et al.
RESULTS
Demographics

Patients with metastatic prostate cancer generally
exhibit a predictable natural history marked by initial
sensitivity to androgen deprivation (castrate sensitive
prostate cancer, CSPC) followed by eventual progression in a subset of patients to an androgen-independent state (castrate-resistant prostate cancer, CRPC)
[27]. A particularly aggressive variant of metastatic
prostate cancer has been described based on the presence of neuroendocrine markers in blood and tissue
in association with a conventional adenocarcinoma
pattern. Features associated with neuroendocrineCRPC (NE-CRPC), or anaplastic prostate cancer, include as a usual pattern of early, visceral metastatic
spread as well as relatively low levels of serum PSA
[28]. Here we conservatively define NE-CRPC based
on the presence of wide-spread metastatic deposits
(bone, visceral, or both) along with a PSA value
1.0 ng/ml. Therefore, we divide our cohort of metastatic prostate cancer patients into three groups as
CSPC, CRPC, and NE-CRPC.
Baseline demographic characteristics of all 44 subjects with metastatic prostate cancer are summarized
in Table I. In the five subjects with CSPC, the median
(range) age and serum PSA were 58.1 (51.1–66.6)
years and 428.6 (2.4–7,606) ng/ml, respectively. Four
of five patients with CSPC had bone metastases (80%)
while one subject had metastatic disease only in
lymph nodes (20%). In 36 subjects with CRPC, the median (range) for age, serum PSA, and duration of androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) was 69.4 (57.5–
87.7) years, 150 (3.6–2403) ng/ml, and 37.2(5.2–174.2)
months, respectively. For patients with imaging studies evaluable within 2 months of study enrollment,
the extent of metastatic disease in these patients was
typical for this population, as 94% (n ¼ 33) subjects
had bone metastases and 29% (n ¼ 28) had lymph

node or visceral metastases. Finally, for the three subjects with NE-CRPC, the age, serum PSA, and duration of ADT were 70.7 (68.1–79.2) years, PSA 0.4
(0.1–0.7) ng/ml, and 33.5 (5.2–174.2) months, respectively. Consistent with the typical presentation for
NE-CRPC, the distribution of metastatic involvement
was distinct from CRPC such that all patients had
extensive lymph node and visceral metastases in
addition to extensive bone metastases (Table II).
AGR2 mRNA is Expressedin CRPC
Since AGR2 has been found to promote metastatic
progression in prostate and other cancer models,
we sought to determine if AGR2 was expressed in
tissue from patients with metastatic prostate cancer.
However, as metastatic tissue is often not available in
patients with CRPC, we evaluated AGR2 mRNA
expression in CTCs. The feasibility of gene-specific
expression analysis based on RNA obtained from
CTC-enriched peripheral blood has been previously
demonstrated [17,20–22,29]. Here we utilized this basic
approach to examine if AGR2 mRNA was expressed
in CTCs in patients with metastatic prostate cancer.
Paired blood samples for CTC enumeration along
with isolation of CTC-enriched peripheral blood RNA
was available from a subset of the overall patient cohort. Specifically 49 samples were identified with 1
CTC/7.5 ml from patients with CRPC (n ¼ 30), CSPC
(n ¼ 2), or NE-CRPC (n ¼ 2). AGR2 mRNA levels,
expressed as average CT  SD, were significantly elevated in samples from patients with metastatic prostate cancer (CT ¼ 33.5  5.4) versus 26 samples
representing normal controls (CT ¼ 37.6  3.7)
(P < 0.001 by Student’s t-test). The absolute difference in CT values of 4.1 cycles equates to 17.1-fold
absolute increase in AGR2 mRNA in subjects versus
controls. Further, we explored the correlation between AGR2 mRNA expression and CTC enumeration in the CRPC subgroup. A strong positive

TABLE I. Summaryof Basic Demographic Datain Patients with Metastatic Prostate Cancer

CSPC (n ¼ 5)
Age (years)
Serum PSA (ng/dl)
CRPC (n ¼ 36)
Age (years)
Serum PSA (ng/dl)
Duration ADT (months)
NE-CRPC (n ¼ 3)
Age (years)
Serum PSA (ng/dl)
Duration ADT (months)

The Prostate

Average (SD)

Median

Range

57.2 (6.4)
1978 (3235)

